# Astronify’s Features

Astronify has a variety of parameters that allow the user to alter how the data is sonified. We will cover some of these parameters as we use Astronify in our code, but here is a written description for your convenience. Naturally, the best place to get the complete details regarding Astronify’s features is in the package’s [documentation]( https://astronify.readthedocs.io/en/latest/astronify/index.html), which I follow from quite closely here.
- *pitch_array* is the range of pitches that can be mapped to the data in Hertz (inverse seconds), with the default being 100 Hertz to 10,000 Hertz.
- The *zero_point* is the value of the data that is mapped to the “central” pitch, which is defined by the parameter *center_pitch*. By default zero_point is set to “median” and center_pitch to 440 Hertz, which means that the median value of the dataset will be sonified by a note with a pitch of 440 Hertz. center_pitch can be set to a float (decimal number) value that represents the pitch in Hertz, and the options for zero_point are “median” (for the median data value), “mean” (for the average value of the data), or a specific number that you choose that represents the value that will be mapped to the center_pitch.
- The *stretch* parameter defines how the data are mapped to the pitch values. The default is “linear”, which is probably the most intuitive; it means there is a linear relationship between the data value and the pitch. However, if we set stretch = “log”, then the data would be mapped to pitch logarithmically, for instance via pitch = log(data value), or some variation thereof. The possible values for stretch are “linear,” “logarithmic,” “hyperbolic sine,” “hyperbolic arcsine,” or “square root.”
- *invert* is a Boolean (True or False) parameter that allows the user to invert the pitch mapping such that higher values are mapped to lower pitches. You might find that some data is easier to sonify with invert = True, but note that the default is False.
- You can use either *minmax_value* or *minmax_percent* to enter an array that defines the minimum and maximum values or percent, respectively of the data to be sonified. For instance, suppose you set minmax_value = [0,50]; now, only data values between 0 and 50 will be sonified. If minmax_percent = [5,95], then the lowest 5% and highest 5% of the data values will be removed from the data array and will not be sonified. This is a useful tool to remove outliers from your sonification. Suppose all of your data is between 0 and 50, except for one point at 1000. That one value at 1000 may or may not be a useful data point rather than an erroneous outlier, but either way it might sound pretty crazy in the sonification! Thus, you might prefer to listen to the sonified data without that point.

We're not going to test changing each of these parameters in detail, but please do feel free to test them out on your own!
